New _extras lesson on sequence alignments (#162)
carpentries-incubator/docker-introduction: _extras/sequence_alignment.md

---
title: "sequence alignment - EMBOSS, clustalomega"
layout: episode
teaching: 10
exercises: 20
questions:
- "How can I align sequences without complex installation?"
- "How can I use a container from within and without?"
- "How can I share/use existing sequence files residing on my computer?"
objectives:
- "Select Docker containers from the docker hub."
- "Use a Docker container to accomplish tasks."

> - "Make use of shared folder."

Author: done

keypoints:
- "You can use existing Docker images instead of installing additional software."
- "Files can be shared with the container and used by the software located witin the container."
- "Software installed within a container can be accessed from outside the container, and can accessed shared files."
---

> ## EMBOSS 
> “The European Molecular Biology Open Software Suite” ([EMBOSS](http://emboss.sourceforge.net/) is a free Open Source software analysis package specially developed for the needs of the molecular biology user community. 

> > EMBOSS contains a large number of sequence analysis tools, and we’ll use one of them using a docker method. 

Author: done

{: .callout}

> The purpose of this tutorial is more about learning how to use a Docker container rather than learning EMBOSS itself. 

Author: done

To learn more about EMBOSS: 
* List of applications: [emboss_apps](http://emboss.sourceforge.net/apps/release/6.6/emboss/apps/index.html) 
* grouped by [function](http://emboss.sourceforge.net/apps/release/6.6/emboss/apps/groups.html), and 
* [emboss tutorials](http://emboss.sourceforge.net/docs/emboss_tutorial/emboss_tutorial.html)

> ## Set-up
- **Macintosh**: Double click on `Terminal` icon in the `/Applications/Utilities directory`.   
-  **Windows**: Open `PowerShell`.  
- **Linux**: open a new shell terminal.  
- If you need to create a Docker ID: go to the [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com) to register a free account.

> {:.prereq}

Author: removed that section as suggested.

In your terminal shell window login Docker with your Docker credentials.

~~~
$ docker login
~~~
{: .language-bash}
~~~
Login with your Docker ID to push and pull images from Docker Hub. 
If you don't have a Docker ID, head over to https://hub.docker.com 
to create one.
Username: YOUR_DOCKER_ID_HERE

> Password: 

Author: Implemented suggested changes (on my branch, where i can write.)

Login Succeeded
$ 
~~~
{: .output}

> We'll use an existing container for EMBOSS version 6.6.0. 

Author: Changes implemented (on my branch, where I can write.)

The following `pull` command will make a copy of the docker image on your local computer.

> Note that the lengthy tag `v6.6.0dfsg-7b1-deb_cv1` is necessary since it is not the `latest` tag.

Author: Implemented suggested change.

> This information would allow you to create your own image from a newer version of Ubuntu.   
> How would you use this information to make your own image?   
> Could you use another Linux distributions?  
> Find help on an earlier section of the workshop if you need, or skip this exercise for now.   
> 
> > ## Solution
> > The [Dockerfile](https://hub.docker.com/r/pegi3s/emboss/dockerfile) from a similar image is shown below:
> > ~~~
> > FROM ubuntu:18.04
> > LABEL emboss.version="6.6.0" \
> >    emboss.web="http://emboss.sourceforge.net"
> > RUN apt-get -qq update && apt-get -y upgrade && \
>	> apt-get install -y emboss=6.6.0+dfsg-6build1
> > ~~~
> > {: .output}
> > 
> > Here are some steps that would accomplish this task:
> > * create a copy of the Dockerfile document to be modified (for example use `nano` as a text editor.)
> > * Check the latest version available for ubuntu, using the [official image](https://hub.docker.com/_/ubuntu) hub page
> > * replace this new version name and tag on the Dockerfile
> > * Run the `docker build -t ...` command
> > * Test your image with a `docker run ...` command

> > > * Push the image to your own hub account for future retrieval

Author: Made suggested changes.

> > 
> > This solution uses Ubuntu, but other Linux distributions could be used. However, this would also require changing the `apt-get` command to that specific to the chosen distribution such as `yum` for CentOS.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Shared directory

> > We'll use the EMBOSS software on files shared from our local computer.

Author: Made suggested changes.

{: .callout}

> Download the [`docker-intro.zip`]({{ page.root }}/files/docker-intro.zip) file. _This file can alternatively be downloaded from the `files` directory in the [docker-introduction GitHub repository][docker-introduction repository]_. Move the downloaded file to your Desktop and unzip it. It should unzip to a folder called `docker-intro`. 

Author: I would not mind that. However, there are other files there and I am not sure if I can combine it all myself. The "basic" and "sum" directories already existed so I followed that pattern. If it can be done by someone else I could prefer as I don't want to mess things up!

> ## Sequences used: glucagon family peptides
> These are very short peptide sequences of the glucagon family to keep the input and output simple.   
> > ## Information on physiological role of sequences:
> > *Glucagon is the principal hyperglycemic hormone, and acts as a counterbalancing hormone to insulin. 
> > Glucagon is a peptide hormone of 29 amino acids that shares the same precursor molecule, proglucagon, with GLP-1 and GLP-2. 
> > By tissue-specific posttranslational processing, glucagon is secreted from pancreatic α cells whereas GLP-1 and GLP-2 are secreted from intestinal L cells. 

> > > All these peptides have considerable sequence similarity (Park (2015).)*   

Author: The DOI is already incuded in the References section at the very bottom of the page. https://doi.org/10.3109/10606820213687

> > > *GIP, a related member of the glucagon peptide superfamily, also regulates nutrient disposal via stimulation of insulin secretion (Brubaker and Drucker (2002).)*

Author: Yes, it is a direct quote from the Abstract of the paper: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12529935/

> {: .solution}

> {: .challenge}

Author: Indeed this is not a challenge, but a place where background information is provided about the sequences. People are usually familiar with insulin, but these are not known. I will change it to a call-out... But in truth a "further information" format is kind of missing (e.g. in the formal template.)

~~~
$ cd ~/Desktop/docker-intro/peptides
$ ls
~~~
{: .language-bash}
~~~
GIP.fa		GLP-1.fa	GLP-2.fa	glucagon.fa
~~~
{: .output}

Since they are very short, we can quickly check the content of all the files at the same time with the
following `cat` command:

~~~
$ cat *.fa
~~~
{: .language-bash}
~~~
>GIP
YAEGTFISDYSIAMDKIRQQDFVNWLLAQ
>GLP-1
HAEGTFTSDVSSYLEGQAAKEFIAWLVKGRG
>GLP-2
HADGSFSDEMNTILDNLAARDFINWLIQTKITD
>glucagon
HSQGTFTSDYSKYLDSRRAQDFVQWLMNT
~~~
{: .output}

We can now start a new container and share the content of the current directory with the container by using the `--mount` qualifier. 
This will create the `/data` directory within the container, sharing the content of the current directory which is invoqued by `${PWD}`.

~~~
$ run -it --rm --mount type=bind,source=${PWD},target=/data biocontainers/emboss:v6.6.0dfsg-7b1-deb_cv1
~~~
{: .language-bash}
~~~
biodocker@f3c591eb2b5f:/data$ 
~~~
{: .output}

The prompt tells us that now we are looking **within** the container.

> ## Exercise: Container checks
>
> What commands would you use to explore the Linux system on the container?     
> What command would you use to find "who" is the default user of this container?     

> > Give it a try before checking the solution.

Author: Extra questions removed as suggested

~~~
Needleman-Wunsch global alignment of two sequences
Gap opening penalty [10.0]: 
Gap extension penalty [0.5]: 
Output alignment [glucagon.needle]: 
~~~
{: .output}

We can now visualize the output alignment file on the screen:

~~~
$ cat glucagon.needle 
~~~
{: .language-bash}
~~~
########################################
# Program: needle
# Rundate: Tue 22 Oct 2019 16:38:08
# Commandline: needle
#    [-asequence] glucagon.fa
#    [-bsequence] GLP-1.fa
# Align_format: srspair
# Report_file: glucagon.needle
########################################

#=======================================
#
# Aligned_sequences: 2
# 1: glucagon
# 2: GLP-1
# Matrix: EBLOSUM62
# Gap_penalty: 10.0
# Extend_penalty: 0.5
#
# Length: 31
# Identity:      14/31 (45.2%)
# Similarity:    22/31 (71.0%)
# Gaps:           2/31 ( 6.5%)
# Score: 88.0
# 
#
#=======================================

glucagon           1 HSQGTFTSDYSKYLDSRRAQDFVQWLMNT--     29
                     |::||||||.|.||:.:.|::|:.||:..  
GLP-1              1 HAEGTFTSDVSSYLEGQAAKEFIAWLVKGRG     31

#---------------------------------------
#--------------------------------------- 
~~~
{: .output}

> While it is nice to have an interactive interface, we can also provide all the required parameters on the comand line in order to make the alignment process *non interactive*. These qualifiers are detailed on the [`needle`](http://emboss.sourceforge.net/apps/release/6.6/emboss/apps/needle.html) help page.

Author: corrected spelling!

We are now back at the prompt of the local computer.

> ## Using EMBOSS from outside the container
> The `docker run` command used previously started an interactive container. 
> This time, we'll provide the  EMBOSS application `needle` command on the same line complete with all parameters, and the container will start, run the EMBOSS application, 
> and then exit after accomplishing its task.
{: .callout}

We can accomplish this by removing the `-it` option from the `docker run` command, and adding the complete `needle` command that includes all the mandatory parameters.
Since the command has become quite long, we can use the continuation symbol `\` to let the shell know that the file is written on 2 lines rather than a single, long line. This time we can align different sequences, for example: GIP.fa and GLP-2.fa.

~~~
$ docker run --rm --mount type=bind,source=${PWD},target=/data biocontainers/emboss:v6.6.0dfsg-7b1-deb_cv1  \
needle GIP.fa GLP-2.fa -outfil gip-glp2.needle -gapopen 10 -gapextend 0.5
~~~
{: .language-bash}
~~~
 Needleman-Wunsch global alignment of two sequences 
~~~
{: .output}

> We can then look just at the bottom of the resulting alignment file:

Author: removed word "just" as suggested.

~~~
$ tail gip-glp2.needle 
~~~
{: .language-bash}
~~~
#
#=======================================

GIP                1 YAEGTFISDYSIAMDKIRQQDFVNWLLAQ----     29
                     :|:|:|..:.:..:|.:..:||:|||:..    
GLP-2              1 HADGSFSDEMNTILDNLAARDFINWLIQTKITD     33

#---------------------------------------
#---------------------------------------
~~~
{: .output}

This can easily be turned into a loop, for example aligning all sequences to that of glucagon.

> The filename extension `.fa` is removed with the `bash` method using `basename` so that the resulting file name only has `.needle` as an extension.  

Author: Added "while retaining the same file name and only modifying the filename extension."

done
~~~
{: .language-bash}
~~~
Needleman-Wunsch global alignment of two sequences
Needleman-Wunsch global alignment of two sequences
Needleman-Wunsch global alignment of two sequences
~~~
{: .output}

The output shows that the program ran 3 times, as expected. The resulting files can be found within the current directory that you can explore using the `cat` or `tail` shell commands for example.

> ## Multiple sequence alignment
> EMBOSS only provides a "wrapper" ([emma](http://emboss.sourceforge.net/apps/release/6.6/emboss/apps/emma.html)) calling an external multiple sequence 
> alignment named `clustalw` which is an older algorithm. For protein sequences one of the recommended algorithm is a similar, newer algorithm named `clustalomega` 
> that we will use within a different docker image.   
> From web [clustalomega documentation](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/seqdb/confluence/display/THD/Clustal+Omega): 
> *Clustal Omega is a multiple sequence alignment program for aligning three or more sequences together in a computationally efficient and accurate manner. 
> It produces biologically meaningful multiple sequence alignments of divergent sequences.*

> > (See Sievers and Higgins (2018).)

Author: DOI names are present. It seems that the GitHub rendering does not convert them automatically as links. I implement the "[]()" standard markdown format to transform them as links.
Also added DOI for "Sievers, F., and D. G. Higgins. 2018" that was missing.

> 

> {: .callout}

Author: I don't agree on this, and perhaps it may be that I don't know how to make it appear clearly as a new chapter: we are going to be doing something new, not possible with the EMBOSS image, and we are going to pull a new image, for a new program "clustalomega". If there is a better way to make this a clear distinction with previous let me know... I leave it as it is now.

> One of the great advantages of Docker is the modularity that it can bring to using software that is not even installed on your own computer.

Author: Removed suggested word "great"

> We can pull the image in advance. Since the `latest` tag exists the command does not requires one. It may still be informative to explore the ["Tags"](https://hub.docker.com/r/pegi3s/clustalomega/tags) page on the hub.

Author: implemented suggestion

GIP           YAEGTFISDYSIAMDKIRQQDFVNWLLAQ----
GLP-1         HAEGTFTSDVSSYLEGQAAKEFIAWLVKGRG--
GLP-2         HADGSFSDEMNTILDNLAARDFINWLIQTKITD
glucagon      HSQGTFTSDYSKYLDSRRAQDFVQWLMNT----
              :::*:* .: .  ::    ::*: **:      
~~~
{: .output}

> ## Challenge: align more sequences.
> How would you proceed to align the hemogloin and globin sequences contained within the file `hglob.fasta`? located in the `~/Desktop/docker-intro/peptides` you copied?
> 
> Would anything be different to align the 32 spike protein sequence from virus SARS_Cov-2 found in file `spike_32.fa` within the `~/Desktop/docker-intro/covid` directory?
> 
> > ## Solution
> >
> > Since we cannot run (for now) the container interactively we need to provide names for the input file and output result files. We can also select an alternate output format.
> > ~~~
> > $ docker run --rm --mount type=bind,source=${PWD},target=/data pegi3s/clustalomega --outfmt=clu -i /data/hglob.fasta -o /data/hglob_aligned.clu
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-bash}
> > For the larger set in `spike_32.fa` we could add `-v` (verbose) to obtain more information from `clustalo` as the software is computing the alignment. 

> > > Nothing else needs to be fundamentally different. Just remember to add `--force` to run the same command again.

Reviewer: Why do they need to force this?  Did they run it before at some point?

Author: If they try to run the same command again there will be an error, easily misunderstood. Adding `--force` is necessary, as written: "to run the same command again."

> >  ~~~
> > $ docker run --rm --mount type=bind,source=${PWD},target=/data pegi3s/clustalomega -v --outfmt=clu -i /data/spike_32.fa -o /data/spike_32_aln.clu
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-bash}
> > ~~~
> > Using 4 threads
> > Read 32 sequences (type: Protein) from /data/spike_32.fa
> > not more sequences (32) than cluster-size (100), turn off mBed
> > Calculating pairwise ktuple-distances...
> > Ktuple-distance calculation progress done. CPU time: 0.37u 0.01s 00:00:00.38 Elapsed: 00:00:00
> > Guide-tree computation done.
> > Progressive alignment progress: 64 % (20 out of 31
> > ~~~
> > {: .output}
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

> ## Challenge: bypassing the entry point.
> How would you proceed to run this container interactively
> since adding `-it` has no effect due to the built-in entry point command?

> > This aspect was explored within an earlier lesson chapter. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This aspect was explored within an earlier episode of this lesson. 
```

Reviewer: Might suggest changing this to mention the exact episode?

Author: I add link as a **relative** path since the full URL would be lost when the lesson is no longer on the "Beta" format:

This aspect was explored within an earlier episode of this lesson ([Creating More Complex Container Images](../advanced-containers/index.html)).

> > ## Solution
> > We can bypass this issue if we add `-it` and `--entrypoint` followed by a suitable command.
> > To simply enter to container the command could be "/bin/sh" or even better with "/bin/bash". For example:
> > ~~~
> > $ docker run --rm -it --entrypoint "/bin/bash"  pegi3s/clustalomega
> > ~~~
> > {: .language-bash}
> > ~~~
> > root@1971dd7cc161:/#
> > ~~~
> > {: .output} 
> > From this point it is possible to explore the content of the container. For example the command `which clustalo` will provide the location of the program.

> > > There is no `/data` directory as it was created "on the fly" in previous commands when sharing a directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > There is no `/data` directory as it was created "on the fly" using mounting when running the previous image containers.
```
